##################################################
Speculations on the Future of Software Development
##################################################

This blog post looks at the problems that have arisen as a result of using a sub-set of human
language as a vehicle for software development and suggests possible routes for improvement. I fully
recognize that some of these suggestions might take up to 20 years to realize.

***********************************
What A Programming System Has To Do
***********************************

There are a number of things that a programming system must do if a program is to be written and
used:

* Facilitate the encoding of the solution to a problem |br| 
  A big problem is translating a problem definition into a solution based on a computer. We have
  progressed from a time when the solution to the problem was the only concern to a time when the
  problem definition and it's translation into a solution, using a programming language, is becoming
  part of the process.
* Represent the block structure of the program |br| 
  A program is a set of nested blocks that contain the other elements that make up a program. The
  block structure of the program must be made apparent to the programmer.
* Represent the logical flow of computer processing |br|
  Programs are full of conditional blocks of code that are only executed when specified conditions
  are met. These conditional blocks and their controls must be fully visible.
* Express language idioms |br|
  Every language has idioms that make it easier to specify complex operations such as `Python` `list
  comprehensions`. These operations must be clearly represented in the program code.
* Specify computations |br| 
  Part of the function of many programs is to perform calculations. The language must support the
  specification of the calculations in an understandable manner.
* Comment the code |br| 
  Programming languages need a way of adding comments to the program that explain what is happening.
* Invoke external library modules |br| 
  A large part of the functionality of a program is not written by the programmer. It comes from a
  variety of external sources and is combined with new code developed by the software developer to
  provide the needed functionality of an application. These external components must integrate
  smoothly into the developer's software development environment.

  * Libraries that are supplied by the implementor of the programming environment being used
  * Libraries that are implemented and maintained by the software development organization that
    supports the developer
  * 3rd. party libraries that are compatible with the programmer's software development environment

* Present the program to a programmer on a computer screen |br| 
  Both now and in the past, the primary method of communication between the software developer and
  the environment on a computer has been the keyboard, mouse and graphics monitor. This is unlikely
  to change in the near future, even though it might be augmented by such technologies such as voice
  recognition or virtual reality headsets which provide some interesting possibilities. For the
  foreseeable future, I believe that the traditional technologies will dominate the programming 
  scene.
* Provide tools for debugging |br| 
  Tools are needed to allow the program execution state at any point to be examined to try and
  determine why a program is not functioning correctly.

*****************
Types of Language
*****************

There are two major types of language that have developed over time. They are oriented towards
solving particular types of problems.

Static Languages
================

Static languages were the first type of language to appear. They assume that the runtime environment
and the structure of the program remain constant over time. They reflect the fact that they are
being asked to help solve static problems where neither the problem itself nor the environment in
which the problem is embedded is changeable. Classic examples of this type of programming language
are `Fortran` and `C`.

Dynamic Languages
=================

Dynamic languages are used in situations of change as when the problem or the environment changes
during execution of the program. Such problems require that the program be capable of modifying
itself to deal with the new conditions. Dynamic languages include those that support dynamic typing.
These languages do not insist that variables that point to objects always contain objects of the
same type. These languages may otherwise be static in their nature. Classic examples of dynamic 
programming language include `Lisp` and `Python`.

*******************
Historical Practice
*******************

Here I take a look at how programming tools have evolved from the beginnings of computers to the
present day.

Programming with toggle switches and machine language
=====================================================

This was the first stage of communication between humans and computers. You needed to know the
instruction set of the computer you were using and you had to manually enter the program that you
wanted to run into the computer, using binary encoding, through toggle switches. This was obviously
a very error-prone and tedious process.

Assembler and Machine Language
==============================

The next stage in communication was the use of assembly language. These were textual representations
of the computer program, consisting of a line of text describing each machine instruction and how it
was to be used. Typically, one coded the program on paper which was turned into a deck of cards by a
key-punch operator. The deck of cards was then read into the computer by a program called an
assembler that translated the textual representation into binary machine instructions and then ran
the program. This procedure, while still tedious, was much less error-prone than the original method
of communication.

High Level languages
====================

High level languages were the next step. They were an attempt to describe the program, textually, in
a manner that was closer to the actual definition of the problem than to the machine instructions
that implemented the program that, hopefully, solved the problem.

A historical presentation of thee use and evolution of these programming languages follows. The
languages are presented in the order that they appeared. The list is far from complete. A language
is discussed here if it was of historical importance or if it presented some concepts that were new
for the time. By examining the appearance of new programming language features we can see how
programming languages evolved over time. All of the languages discussed here are still in use and
have evolved greatly since their beginnings, taking new ideas from each other and from other
sources. I, personally, have used most of the languages presented here except for `Haskell` and
`Prolog`. In addition, I have used assembler language for assorted computers. Today I work primarily
in `Python`.

High level language development environment
-------------------------------------------

High level languages, from their inception, have always used a number of tools to permit the
development process to take place. These tools evolved along side the development of the languages
themselves. This summary is presented here to help understand how language use is supported in a
software development environment.

Editor
^^^^^^

The editor is the tool that supports the actual writing of the computer program. It has evolved
significantly over time. The first editors were constrained by the environment in which they had to
work. They had to operate on text based, line oriented terminals so they integrated these
constraints into their mode of operation. The constraints were partially due to the environment that
they worked in but also to the nature of the programming languages that they worked with which were
textual, line oriented languages. Examples of this type of interface that are used today include
systems like `Emacs` on `Linux` and `Notepad++` on `Windows`.

Today, a new breed of editors has appeared. They are still geared to producing text based output as
were their predecessors, but they are integrated into a modern `Graphical User Interface (GUI)` that
gives them a new visual appearance and mode of operation. Even with these changes, they are
fundamentally the same as the older fashioned editors. Modern examples tend to be embedded in
Integrated Development Environments as discussed below. One good modern example that is not so
embedded is Visual Studio Code from Microsoft which is now available on all major modern operating
system platforms such as `Windows`, `Linux`, and `MacOS`

Compiler
^^^^^^^^

This component takes the output from an editor and translates it into an internal form depending on
the nature of the programming language and the environment. Examples of this internal format
include:

* Machine Language |br| 
  Most static programming languages compile directly to machine code. The resultant program is ready
  for use almost immediately. This is ample for many programs that do not change their nature during
  execution.
* Bytecode |br| 
  Some programming languages such as `Java` offer the facility of writing the program once but of
  having the ability to run the program anywhere, so long as the platform is supported by `Java`.
  These programs compile to a form of intermediate language known as bytecode that is platform
  independent. The bytecode is either interpreted at runtime, or it is translated to machine code
  when the program is installed on a target system. The second option maximizes the performance of
  the program by avoiding runtime processing to interpret the bytecode.
* Intermediate Language |br| 
  Most dynamic languages make use of an intermediate language internally. Because they modify
  themselves in various ways, it has been found to be easier to actually modify the internal
  language at runtime than it is to modify the machine code. Such languages are often called
  interpreted languages because they use a program tool known as an interpreter that translates the
  intermediate language into machine code when needed.

Linker
^^^^^^

Debugger
^^^^^^^^

Runtime
^^^^^^^

Integrated development environment - IDE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

High level language development history
---------------------------------------

A selection of the most important languages is given here. It grew substantially during the writing
of this post because I wanted to show the evolution of programming ideas clearly.

Fortran - 1957
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lisp - 1958
^^^^^^^^^^^

Cobol -1960
^^^^^^^^^^^

Algol 60 - 1960
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

RPG - 1960
^^^^^^^^^^

Basic - 1964
^^^^^^^^^^^^

PL/I - 1966
^^^^^^^^^^^

Algol 68 - 1968
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pascal - 1970
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

C - 1973
^^^^^^^^

Prolog - 1974?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Smalltalk - 1980
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

C++ - 1985
^^^^^^^^^^

Bash - 1989
^^^^^^^^^^^

Python - 1990
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Haskell - 1990
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JavaScript - 1995
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Java - 1996
^^^^^^^^^^^

Power Shell - 2006
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**********************************
Conventional Programming Languages
**********************************

This section examines the language based methods that are currently used to define what a program is
expected to do.

*********************
Structure-First Idiom
*********************

This section provides some suggestions on how a programming idiom could best support the creation
and maintenance of programs and avoid the problems generated by the use of conventional programming
languages.

**********************************
Integrated Application Environment
**********************************

Here, I pull all the ideas together and speculate on what might be possible.
